since Trump's Victory earlier this month
the dollar has surged as investors bet
that his program of tariffs and tax cuts
will force the dollar up but while this
might sound like good news Trump and his
vice president JD Vance actually spent
the campaign calling for a weak dollar
which they hoped could rejuvenate
America's manufacturing base so in this
video we're going to look at why Trump
wants a weaker dollar and how he could
go about actually devaluing the world's
Reserve currency
[Music]
so let's start by taking a look at what
Trump has actually said the last time he
talked about this explicitly seems to
have been in Late July when during an
interview with Bloomberg he said that
the Dollar's strength specifically
against the Yen and the yuan is quote a
big currency problem but this has
actually been a long-standing issue for
Trump he constantly complained that the
dollar was overvalued during its first
term and pushed the Federal Reserve to
cut rates to bring its value you down
this is something that JD Vance has
talked about too last year when Vance
was questioning Federal Reserve chair
Jerome pal he suggested the dollar was
fundamentally overvalued and in April he
told Politico devaluing of course is a
scary word but what it really means is
American exports become cheaper now to
be fair to Trump there is a relatively
widespread consensus that the dollar is
indeed overvalued the IMF reckons that
the dollar is overvalued by about 10%
and it's been consistently strengthening
against other currencies with the
so-called broad dollar Index increasing
by 25% over the past two decades this is
despite the fact the US usually runs
pretty hefty trade deficits I.E it
Imports more than it exports which
should entail a weaker currency so why
is the dollar overvalued well the main
reason is its status as the world's
Reserve currency in other words the
currency That central banks and
financial institutions like to hold in
reserve because it's considered safe and
this creates more demand for dollarss
internationally artificially inflating
its value so why does Trump actually
want to devalue it after all at first
glance having an overvalued currency
sounds like an advantage and it's
something that America's adversaries
including Russia and China regularly
complain about an overvalued currency
means that you get to import more than
you otherwise could and the Dollar's
status as the world's Reserve currencies
is one of the reasons that the US can
unilaterally impose such punishing
Financial sanctions but while there are
clearly some advantages over the past
few years some commentators have started
wondering whether this might actually be
a bad thing the main downside is that an
overvalue currency makes your exports
less competitive internationally which
is especially bad news for your
manufacturing base who struggle to
export and are often undercut by cheaper
Imports and this is the argument made by
both Trump and Vance in his Bloomberg
interview Trump claimed I've been
talking to manufacturers no one wants to
buy our products because it's too
expensive and Vance described the
Dollar's Reserve status as a massive tax
on American Producers in fact today
there's a relatively widespread
consensus that the Dollar's Reserve
status has contributed to America's
de-industrialization and as politicians
have become increasingly keen on
rebuilding America's manufacturing base
they've started questioning the Dollar's
Reserve status American politicians also
often attribute China's economic success
to its practice of deliberately
devaluing its currency which has kept
exports compe positive and protected its
industrial base at the same time other
countries have started pushing back
against the Dollar's Reserve status as
the US has ramped up its use of
financial sanctions but regardless can
Trump actually devalue the dollar well
before we get into how he might actually
do it it's worth noting that most of
Trump's other economic policies would
actually result in a stronger not weaker
dollar his famous tffs for instance
would probably result in a stronger
dollar for two reasons firstly most
people think that tariffs would result
in higher inflation which would prompt
the Federal Reserve to raise interest
rates and higher interest rates usually
mean a more valuable currency because it
makes it more attractive to save in that
currency this Dynamic would be
exacerbated by proposed tax cuts which
would also Stoke inflation by increasing
disposable income second countries like
China might respond to tariffs by
further devaluing their currencies which
would effectively push up the value of
the dollar given its value is defined
relative to other currencies this is
actually why the dollar has appreciated
since Trump's Victory as investors began
to bet on high tariffs and therefore a
stronger dollar Trump has also made it
clear that he wants to maintain the
Dollar's Reserve status threatening to
impose 100% tariffs on countries that
quote leave the dollar and telling the
economic Club of New York that quote
losing the world currency would be the
equivalent of losing a war so if the
analysis we've outlined is correct
protecting or reinforcing the Dollar's
Reserve currency status will probably
mean a stronger not weaker dollar but
even if he dropped these policies or
they didn't have the impact that most
people expect it still wouldn't be easy
for Trump to actively weaken the dollar
in theory weakening your currency
shouldn't be all that difficult or after
all all you need to do is print a load
of it and use it to buy other currencies
on the market but the fundamental issue
here is that the Federal Reserve which
as America Central Bank is the only
entity that can print dollars is
operationally independent so the
president just can't tell them what to
do in this light there are sort of four
ways that Trump could still force a
devaluation the first is to put pressure
on the FED to either intervene in
currency markets or cut rates which
would also weaken the dollar although
undermining the feds perceived
Independence would really spook the
markets the second is for the government
to intervene in currency markets itself
but this would require spending and
therefore probably borrowing literally
trillions of dollars the third would be
introduce some sort of capital controls
which would basically limit how many
dollar-based assets foreigners can buy
or maybe a tax on dollar based assets
which would functionally do the same
thing this would however definitely
undermine the Dollar's Reserve status
and represent a dramatic U-turn for a
country long renowned for its open
Financial system the fourth and perhaps
most feasible option though is to brow
America's major trading partners into
some sort of deal akin to the 1985 Plaza
record in agreement with France West
Germany Japan the United Kingdom and the
United States to lower the value of the
dollar at the time they did this by
countries like Japan and Germany
agreeing to boost domestic Demand with
tax cuts well simultaneously the US
agreed to reduce Demand by cutting
government spending and all parties
agreed to intervene in currency markets
to help bring down the dollar now the
plaza record did work but pulling off
something similar this time could be
more difficult not only are currency
flows way bigger and so harder to
manipulate but America's Main trading
partners are no longer just its allies
and agreeing a currency deal with China
could be difficult this is just one of
many major stories going on with 2024
marking a major year in both news and
elections in fact with the majority of
the world heading to the polls 2024 has
been a pretty unique and important year
so in the latest issue of our magazine
too long we discussed those elections
diving deep into the 29 biggest
elections of the year making sure that
you understand what really happened and
commemorating one of the biggest years
in news we don't just discuss elections
though we also run through China's trade
issues Biden's successes and failures
the UK's new opposition leader and the
state of the wars in Ukraine and Gaza
plus the fact that it's a magazine means
that we're not constrained by the time
limits or algorithms imposed by YouTube
unlike fleeting news Cycles or
algorithmic feeds too long offers
thought-provoking analysis and
comprehensive coverage that's truly
worth holding purchasing is also a great
way to support the channel running TIR
this year has cost just under 800,000
so if you've enjoyed our coverage in
20124 then picking up a copy of too long
doesn't just get you high quality
reporting it also allows you to invest
in independent journalism and join us in
shaping the future of news so if you're
convinced you have three more decisions
to make firstly do you want a physical
or a digital copy the physical one is a
highquality 60-page perfect bound
magazine shipped right to your door but
the digital is slightly cheaper
especially if you're concerned about
shipping your second choice is the
standard or Premium Edition the standard
is just a copy of the magazine while the
premium issue gets you access to a
behind the scenes monthly podcast the
bullpen we break down all of the
production that goes into too long and
TDR more generally as well as getting
your name printed in the thank you
section of the magazine and your final
decision is if you want to subscribe if
you do you'll get a copy of two long
every 4 months meaning that you'll never
miss an issue plus you'll also get 25%
of every copy as long as you stay
subscribed if you can subscribing also
gives us a reliable income stream which
is super useful for us regardless of
which option you choose you can buy a
copy right now at to long. newws or by
clicking the link in the description as
always thanks for your support and
thanks for backing too long